---
layout: post
title:  "Data Task"
subtitle: "Writing a script to collect and clean data"
date:   2017-07-21 19:34:01
categories: [Computers]
---

___

In Assignment Four for INLS 161 we had to create two scripts 1. One that took input from users and then stored their responses   to a CSV file.  2. A second script that allowed myself to write the information gathered into a MySQL database instead of into a   CSV file as the final output form. My Github repository for this assignment can be found [here](https://github.com/jawitzke/jawitzke-data)

The data I gathered was very simple and just included the user typing in their date of birth and the location of where they were  born. This was collected by using the following code:
{% highlight bash %} # Prompting Five Questions and storing input
echo "1. Please type in the four digit year you were born in followed by [Enter]:"
read YEAR
echo "2. Please type in the two digit month you were born in followed by [Enter]:"
read MONTH
echo "3. Please type in the two digit day you were born in followed by [Enter]:"
read DAY
echo "4. Please type in the city you were born in followed by [Enter]:"
read CITY
echo "5. Please type in the state you were born in followed by [Enter]:"
read STATE
{% endhighlight %}

This prompted users to type in their input, read the input, and stored the input as the correspounding variables. Next I added a the date of the input and a unique ID value to each input collection by using the following code:
{% highlight bash %} #Putting date stamp
INPUT_DATE=`date --iso-8601=seconds`
#create unique identifier
UUID=$(cat /dev/urandom | tr -dc 'a-zA-Z0-9' | fold -w 32 | head -n 1)
{% endhighlight %}

Next I wrote the data to a temporary csv file, read the csv file, and called the script that will write the csv file to the database by using the following code:
{% highlight bash %} #write data to tmp.csv
echo "$UUID,$YEAR,$MONTH,$DAY,$CITY,$STATE,$INPUT_DATE" >./tmp.csv
#Read out the data in the CSV file
cat tmp.csv
#write data to database
bash ./write-to-db.sh
{% endhighlight %}

The Script that writes to a the CSV file first sets up the variables for the mysql username, password, mysql database, and  mysql table. I then move the data files to the mysql secure directory, so they can be inported into the table. I then check  to see if a mysql database and table have been created using if statements. If they are not created. I have them created. This was mainly only needed to see if it is the first input, or else both would have been made. I then write the data from the csv file into the database, dump the current version of the database into a sql file with the title being the date, and reomve the temporary csv file from the mysql secure directory. This can be seen by the following code:
{% highlight bash %} #!/bin/bash
#setting credentials as variables
USER=root
PASSWORD=root
#setting datbase and table names
DATABASE=input
TABLE=tblInput
#moving data to mysql secure directory
sudo cp ./tmp.csv /var/lib/mysql-files/
echo "The data has been copied to a secure directory"
#chech if database exists, and if not make database
DBCHECK=`mysql -u"$USER" -p"$PASSWORD" -e "show databases;" | grep -Fo $DATABASE`
if [ "$DBCHECK" == "$DATABASE" ]; then
   echo "Database does exists"
else
   echo "Database does not exist. Making database..."
   mysql -u"$USER" -p"$PASSWORD" -e "CREATE DATABASE $DATABASE"
fi
# Check if table exists, and if not, make table
echo "Checking for table..."
DBCHECK=`mysql -u"$USER" -p"$PASSWORD" -e "show tables;" $DATABASE | grep -Fo $TABLE`
if [ "$DBCHECK" == "$TABLE" ]; then
   echo "Table does exists"
else
   echo "Table does not exist. Making table..."
   mysql -u"$USER" -p"$PASSWORD" -e "CREATE TABLE $TABLE (ID VARCHAR(255), Year INT, Month INT, Day INT, City VARCHAR(255), State VARCHAR(255), Date TIMESTAMP); ALTER TABLE $TABLE ADD PRIMARY KEY (ID);" $DATABASE
fi
# Put data from tmp.csv into proper table in the proper databse
echo "Writing new data to $TABLE in database $DATABASE."
mysql -u"$USER" -p"$PASSWORD" -e "LOAD DATA INFILE '/var/lib/mysql-files/tmp.csv' INTO TABLE $TABLE FIELDS TERMINATED BY ',' OPTIONALLY ENCLOSED BY '\"';" $DATABASE
echo "Data written successfully."
# Dump current version of database into export file
echo "Survey data dumped to file `date --iso-8601`-$DATABASE.sql"
mysqldump -u"$USER" -p"$PASSWORD" $DATABASE > `date --iso-8601`-$DATABASE.sql
# removing data from mysql secure directory
sudo rm /var/lib/mysql-files/tmp.csv
{% endhighlight %}




___


<div>
	  <p>
     <script>
						var week_days = new Array(8);
								week_days[1] = "Sunday";
								week_days[2] = "Monday";
								week_days[3] = "Tuesday";
								week_days[4] = "Wednesday";
								week_days[5] = "Thursday";
								week_days[6] = "Friday";
								week_days[7] = "Saturday";
								
						var month_array = new Array(13);
								month_array[1] = "January";
								month_array[2] = "February";
								month_array[3] = "March";
								month_array[4] = "April";
								month_array[5] = "May";
								month_array[6] = "June";
								month_array[7] = "July";
								month_array[8] = "August";
								month_array[9] = "September";
								month_array[10] = "October";
								month_array[11] = "November";
								month_array[12] = "December";
								
						var date_obj = new 	Date(document.lastModified)
						var curr_day = week_days[date_obj.getDay() + 1]
						var curr_month = month_array[date_obj.getMonth() + 1]
						var curr_date = date_obj.getDate()
						var curr_year = date_obj.getYear()	
							if (curr_year < 2000)
								curr_year+=1900
								document.write("Last updated on" + " " + curr_day + ", " 
								+ curr_month + " " + curr_date + " " + curr_year)
					  </script>
           </p>
      </div>
